=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-1.pdf ===
Biology is the science of life forms and living processes. The living world
comprises an amazing diversity of living organisms. Early man could
easily perceive the difference between inanimate matter and living
organisms. Early man deified some of the inanimate matter (wind, sea,
fire etc.) and some among the animals and plants. A common feature of
all such forms of inanimate and animate objects was the sense of awe
or fear that they evoked. The description of living organisms including
human beings began much later in human history. Societies which
indulged in anthropocentric view of biology could register limited
progress in biological knowledge. Systematic and monumental
description of life forms brought in, out of necessity, detailed systems
of identification, nomenclature and classification. The biggest spin off
of such studies was the recognition of the sharing of similarities among
living organisms both horizontally and vertically. That all present day
living organisms are related to each other and also to all organisms
that ever lived on this earth, was a revelation which humbled man and
led to cultural movements for conservation of biodiversity. In the
following chapters of this unit, you will get a description, including
classification, of animals and plants from a taxonomist’s perspective.
DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD
Chapter 1
The Living World
Chapter 2
Biological Classification
Chapter 3
Plant Kingdom
Chapter 4
Animal Kingdom
UNIT 1
2024-25

Born on 5 July 1904,

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-10.pdf ===
120
BIOLOGY
Are you aware that all organisms, even the largest, start their life from a
single cell? You may wonder how a single cell then goes on to form such
large organisms. Growth and reproduction are characteristics of cells,
indeed of all living organisms. All cells reproduce by dividing into two,
with each parental cell giving rise to two daughter cells each time they
divide. These newly formed daughter cells can themselves grow and divide,
giving rise to a new cell population that is formed by the growth and
division of a single parental cell and its progeny. In other words, such
cycles of growth and division allow a single cell to form a structure
consisting of millions of cells.
10.1
CELL CYCLE
Cell division is a very important  process in all living organisms. During
the division of a cell, DNA replication and cell growth also take place. All
these processes, i.e., cell division, DNA replication, and cell growth, hence,
have to take place in a coordinated way to ensure correct division and
formation of progeny cells containing intact genomes. The sequence of
events by which a cell duplicates its genome, synthesises the other
constituents of the cell and eventually divides into two daughter cells is
termed cell cycle. Although cell growth (in terms of cytoplasmic increase)
is a continuous process, DNA synthesis occurs only during one specific
stage in the cell cycle. The replicated chromosomes (DNA) are then
distributed to daughter nuclei by a complex series of even

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-11.pdf ===
UNIT 4
The description of structure and variation of living organisms over a
period of time, ended up as two, apparently irreconcilable perspectives
on biology. The two perspectives essentially rested on two levels of
organisation of life forms and phenomena. One described at organismic
and above level of organisation while the second described at cellular
and molecular level of organisation. The first resulted in ecology and
related disciplines. The second resulted in physiology and biochemistry.
Description of physiological processes, in flowering plants as an
example, is what is given in the chapters in this unit. The processes of
photosynthesis, respiration and ultimately plant growth and
development are described in molecular terms but in the context of
cellular activities and even at organism level. Wherever appropriate,
the relation of the physiological processes to environment is also
discussed.
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 11
Photosynthesis in Higher
Plants
Chapter 12
Respiration in Plants
Chapter 13
Plant Growth and
Development
2024-25

MELVIN CALVIN born in Minnesota in April, 1911, received his
Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Minnesota. He served
as Professor of Chemistry at the University of California,
Berkeley.
Just after world war II, when the world was under shock
after the Hiroshima-Nagasaki bombings, and seeing the ill-
effects of radio-activity, Calvin and co-workers put radio-
activity to beneficial use. He along with J.A. Bassham studied
reactions 

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-12.pdf ===
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
153
All of us breathe to live, but why is breathing so essential to life? What
happens when we breathe? Also, do all living organisms, including plants
and microbes, breathe? If so, how?
All living organisms need energy for carrying out daily life activities,
be it absorption, transport, movement, reproduction or even breathing.
Where does all this energy come from? We know we eat food for energy –
but how is this energy taken from food?  How is this energy utilised? Do
all foods give the same amount of energy? Do plants ‘eat’? Where do plants
get their energy from? And micro-organisms – for their energy
requirements, do they eat ‘food’?
You may wonder at the several questions raised above – they may
seem to be very disconnected.  But in reality, the process of breathing is
very much connected to the process of release of energy from food.  Let us
try and understand how this happens.
All the energy required for ‘life’ processes is obtained by oxidation of
some macromolecules that we call ‘food’. Only green plants and
cyanobacteria can prepare their own food; by the process of photosynthesis
they trap light energy and convert it into chemical energy that is stored in
the bonds of carbohydrates like glucose, sucrose and starch.  We must
remember that in green plants too, not all cells, tissues and organs
photosynthesise; only cells containing chloroplasts, that are most often
located in the superficial layers, carry out photosynthesis.  Hence, even
in gree

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-13.pdf ===
166
BIOLOGY
You have already studied the organisation of a flowering plant in Chapter
5. Have you ever thought about where and how the structures like roots,
stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds arise and that too in an orderly
sequence? You are, by now, aware of the terms seed, seedling, plantlet,
mature plant. You have also seen that trees continue to increase in height
or girth over a period of time. However, the leaves, flowers and fruits of the
same tree not only have limited dimensions but also appear and fall
periodically and some time repeatedly. Why does vegetative phase precede
flowering in a plant? All plant organs are made up of a variety of tissues; is
there any relationship between the structure of a cell, a tissue, an organ
and the function they perform? Can the structure and the function of these
be altered? All cells of a plant are descendents of the zygote. The question
is, then, why and how do they have different structural and functional
attributes? Development is the sum of two processes: growth and
differentiation. To begin with, it is essential and sufficient to know that the
development of a mature plant from a zygote (fertilised egg) follow a precise
and highly ordered succession of events. During this process a complex
body organisation is formed that produces roots, leaves, branches, flowers,
fruits, and seeds, and eventually they die (Figure 13.1). The first step in the
process of plant growth is seed germination. The seed germinates when
favou

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-14.pdf ===
UNIT 5
The reductionist  approach to study of life forms resulted in increasing
use of physico-chemical concepts and techniques. Majority of these
studies employed either surviving tissue model or straightaway cell-
free systems. An explosion of knowledge resulted in molecular biology.
Molecular physiology became almost synonymous with biochemistry
and biophysics. However, it is now being increasingly realised that
neither a purely organismic approach nor a purely reductionistic
molecular approach would reveal the truth about biological processes
or living phenomena. Systems biology makes us believe that all living
phenomena are emergent properties due to interaction among
components of the system under study. Regulatory network of
molecules, supra molecular assemblies, cells, tissues, organisms and
indeed, populations and communities, each create emergent
properties. In the chapters under this unit, major human physiological
processes like, exchange of gases, blood circulation, locomotion and
movement are described in cellular and molecular terms. The last
two chapters point to the coordination and regulation of body events
at the organismic level.
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 14
Breathing and Exchange
of Gases
Chapter 15
Body Fluids and
Circulation
Chapter 16
Excretory Products and
their Elimination
Chapter 17
Locomotion and Movement
Chapter 18
Neural Control and
Coordination
Chapter 19
Chemical Coordination
and Integration
2024-25

ALFONSO CORTI, Italian anatomist, was born in

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-15.pdf ===
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
193
You have learnt that all living cells have to be provided with nutrients, O2
and other essential substances. Also, the waste or harmful substances
produced, have to be removed continuously for healthy functioning of
tissues. It is therefore, essential to have efficient mechanisms for the
movement of these substances to the cells and from the cells. Different
groups of animals have evolved different methods for this transport. Simple
organisms like sponges and coelenterates circulate water from their
surroundings through their body cavities to facilitate the cells to exchange
these substances. More complex organisms use special fluids within their
bodies to transport such materials. Blood is the most commonly used body
fluid by most of the higher organisms including humans for this purpose.
Another body fluid, lymph, also helps in the transport of certain substances.
In this chapter, you will learn about the composition and properties of
blood and lymph (tissue fluid) and the mechanism of circulation of blood
is also explained herein.
15.1
BLOOD
Blood is a special connective tissue consisting of a fluid matrix, plasma,
and formed elements.
15.1.1 Plasma
Plasma is a straw coloured, viscous fluid constituting nearly 55 per cent of
the blood. 90-92 per cent of plasma is water and proteins contribute 6-8
per cent of it. Fibrinogen, globulins and albumins are the major proteins.
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
CHAPTER  15
15.1 Blood
15.2 Lymph (Tissue
Fl

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-16.pdf ===
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
205
Animals accumulate ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, water
and ions like Na+, K+, Cl–, phosphate, sulphate, etc., either by metabolic
activities or by other means like excess ingestion. These substances have
to be removed totally or partially. In this chapter, you will learn the
mechanisms of elimination of these substances with special emphasis on
common nitrogenous wastes. Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major
forms of nitrogenous wastes excreted by the animals. Ammonia is the
most toxic form and requires large amount of water for its elimination,
whereas uric acid, being the least toxic, can be removed with a minimum
loss of water.
The process of excreting ammonia is Ammonotelism. Many bony fishes,
aquatic amphibians and aquatic insects are ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic in nature.
Ammonia, as it is readily soluble, is generally excreted by diffusion across
body surfaces or through gill surfaces (in fish) as ammonium ions. Kidneys
do not play any significant role in its removal. Terrestrial adaptation
necessitated the production of lesser toxic nitrogenous wastes like urea
and uric acid for conservation of water. Mammals, many terrestrial
amphibians and marine fishes mainly excrete urea and are called ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
animals. Ammonia produced by metabolism is converted into urea in the
liver of these animals and released into the blood which is filtered a

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-17.pdf ===
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
217
Movement is one of the  significant features of living beings. Animals and
plants exhibit a wide range of movements. Streaming of protoplasm in
the unicellular organisms like Amoeba is a simple form of movement.
Movement of cilia, flagella and tentacles are shown by many organisms.
Human beings can move limbs, jaws, eyelids, tongue, etc. Some of the
movements result in a change of place or location. Such voluntary
movements are called locomotion. Walking, running, climbing, flying,
swimming are all some forms of locomotory movements. Locomotory
structures need not be different from those affecting other types of
movements. For example, in Paramoecium, cilia helps in the movement of
food through cytopharynx and in locomotion as well. Hydra can use its
tentacles for capturing its prey and also use them for locomotion. We use
limbs for changes in body postures and locomotion as well. The above
observations suggest that movements and locomotion cannot be studied
separately. The two may be linked by stating that all locomotions are
movements but all movements are not locomotions.
Methods of locomotion performed by animals vary with their habitats
and the demand of the situation. However, locomotion is generally for
search of food, shelter, mate, suitable breeding grounds, favourable
climatic conditions or to escape from enemies/predators.
17.1
TYPES OF MOVEMENT
Cells of the human body exhibit three main types of movements, namely,
amoeboid, ciliary and 

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-18.pdf ===
230
BIOLOGY
As you know, the functions of the organs/organ systems in our body
must be coordinated to maintain homeostasis. Coordination is the
process through which two or more organs interact and complement the
functions of one another. For example, when we do physical exercises,
the energy demand is increased for maintaining an increased muscular
activity. The supply of oxygen is also increased. The increased supply of
oxygen necessitates an increase in the rate of respiration, heart beat and
increased blood flow via blood vessels. When physical exercise is stopped,
the activities of nerves, lungs, heart and kidney gradually return to their
normal conditions. Thus, the functions of muscles, lungs, heart, blood
vessels, kidney and other organs are coordinated while performing physical
exercises. In our body the neural system and the endocrine system jointly
coordinate and integrate all the activities of the organs so that they function
in a synchronised fashion.
The neural system provides an organised network of point-to-point
connections for a quick coordination. The endocrine system provides
chemical integration through hormones. In this chapter, you will learn
about the neural system of human, mechanisms of neural coordination
like transmission of nerve impulse, impulse conduction across a synapse.
NEURAL CONTROL AND
COORDINATION
CHAPTER  18
18.1 Neural System
18.2 Human Neural
System
18.3 Neuron as
Structural and
Functional Unit
of Neural
System
18.4  Central Neural
Sys

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-19.pdf ===
239
239
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
You have already learnt that the neural system provides a
point-to-point rapid coordination among organs. The neural
coordination is fast but short-lived. As the nerve fibres do not innervate
all cells of the body and the cellular functions need to be continuously
regulated; a special kind of coordination and integration has to be
provided. This function is carried out by hormones. The neural system
and the endocrine system jointly coordinate and regulate the
physiological functions in the body.
19.1
ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES
Endocrine glands lack ducts and are hence, called ductless glands. Their
secretions are called hormones. The classical definition of hormone as a
chemical produced by endocrine glands and released into the blood and
transported to a distantly located target organ has current scientific
definition as follows: Hormones are non-nutrient chemicals which
act as intercellular messengers and are produced in trace amounts.
The new definition covers a number of new molecules in addition to the
hormones secreted by the organised endocrine glands. Invertebrates
possess very simple endocrine systems with few hormones whereas a large
number of chemicals act as hormones and provide coordination in the
vertebrates. The human endocrine system is described here.
CHEMICAL COORDINATION
AND INTEGRATION
CHAPTER  19
19.1 Endocrine
Glands and
Hormones
19.2 Human
Endocrine
System
19.3 Hormones of
Heart, Kidney
and
Gastrointestin

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-2.pdf ===
10
BIOLOGY
Since the dawn of civilisation, there have been many attempts to classify
living organisms. It was done instinctively not using criteria that were
scientific but borne out of a need to use organisms for our own use – for
food, shelter and clothing.  Aristotle was the earliest to attempt a more
scientific basis for classification. He used simple morphological characters
to classify plants into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animals
into two groups, those which had red blood and those that did not.
In Linnaeus' time a Two Kingdom system of classification with
Plantae  and Animalia kingdoms was developed that included all
plants and animals respectively. This system did not distinguish between
the eukaryotes and prokaryotes, unicellular and multicellular organisms
and photosynthetic (green algae) and non-photosynthetic (fungi)
organisms. Classification of organisms into plants and animals was easily
done and was easy to understand, but, a large number of organisms
did not fall into either category. Hence the two kingdom classification
used for a long time was found inadequate.  Besides, gross morphology
a need was also felt for including other characteristics like cell structure,
nature of wall, mode of nutrition, habitat, methods of reproduction,
evolutionary relationships, etc.  Classification systems for the living
organisms have hence, undergone several changes over the time.
Though plant and animal kingdoms have been a constant under all
different syste

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-3.pdf ===
PLANT KINGDOM
23
In the previous chapter, we looked at the broad classification of living
organisms under the system proposed by Whittaker (1969) wherein he
suggested the Five Kingdom classification viz. Monera, Protista, Fungi,
Animalia and Plantae.  In this chapter, we will deal in detail with further
classification within Kingdom Plantae popularly known as the ‘plant
kingdom’.
We must stress here that our understanding of the plant kingdom
has changed over time. Fungi, and members of the Monera and Protista
having cell walls have now been excluded from Plantae though earlier
classifications placed them in the same kingdom.  So, the cyanobacteria
that are also referred to as blue green algae are not ‘algae’ any more.  In
this chapter, we will describe Algae, Bryophytes, Pteridophytes,
Gymnosperms and Angiosperms under Plantae .
Let us also look at classification within angiosperms to understand
some of the concerns  that influenced the classification systems. The
earliest systems of classification used only gross superficial morphological
characters such as habit, colour, number and shape of leaves, etc.  They
were based mainly on vegetative characters or on the androecium
structure (system given by Linnaeus). Such systems were artificial; they
separated the closely related species since they were based on a few
characteristics. Also, the artificial systems gave equal weightage to
vegetative and sexual characteristics; this is not acceptable since we know
that often the veg

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-4.pdf ===
ANIMAL KINGDOM
37
37
When you look around, you will observe different animals with different
structures and forms.  As over a million species of animals have been
described till now, the need for classification becomes all the more
important. The classification also helps in assigning a systematic position
to newly described species.
4.1
BASIS OF CLASSIFICATION
Inspite of differences in structure and form of different animals, there are
fundamental features common to various individuals in relation to the
arrangement of cells, body symmetry, nature of coelom, patterns of
digestive, circulatory or reproductive systems. These features are used
as the basis of animal classification and some of them are discussed here.
4.1.1
Levels of Organisation
Though all members of Animalia are multicellular, all of them do not
exhibit the same pattern of organisation of cells. For example, in sponges,
the cells are arranged as loose cell aggregates, i.e., they exhibit cellular
level of organisation. Some division of labour (activities) occur among
the cells. In coelenterates, the arrangement of cells is more complex. Here
the cells performing the same function are arranged into tissues, hence is
called tissue level of organisation. A still higher level of organisation, i.e.,
organ level is exhibited by members of Platyhelminthes and other higher
phyla where tissues are grouped together to form organs, each specialised
for a particular function. In animals like Annelids, Arthropods, Molluscs,

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-5.pdf ===
UNIT 2
The description of the diverse forms of life on earth was made only by
observation – through naked eyes or later through magnifying lenses
and microscopes. This description is mainly of gross structural features,
both external and internal. In addition, observable and perceivable
living phenomena were also recorded as part of this description. Before
experimental biology or more specifically, physiology, was established
as a part of biology, naturalists described only biology. Hence, biology
remained as a natural history for a long time. The description, by itself,
was amazing in terms of detail. While the initial reaction of a student
could be boredom, one should keep in mind  that the detailed description,
was utilised in the later day reductionist biology where living processes
drew more attention from scientists than the description of life forms
and their structure. Hence, this description became meaningful and
helpful in framing research questions in physiology or evolutionary
biology. In the following chapters of this unit, the structural organisation
of plants and animals, including the structural basis of physiologial or
behavioural phenomena, is described. For convenience, this description
of morphological and anatomical features is presented separately for
plants and animals.
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION
IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS
Chapter 5
Morphology of
Flowering Plants
Chapter 6
Anatomy of Flowering
Plants
Chapter 7
Structural Organisation in
Animals
2024-25

KATHER

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-6.pdf ===
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
71
You can very easily see the structural similarities and variations in the
external morphology of the larger living organism, both plants and
animals. Similarly, if we were to study the internal structure, one also
finds several similarities as well as differences. This chapter introduces
you to the internal structure and functional organisation of higher plants.
Study of internal structure of plants is called anatomy. Plants have cells
as the basic unit, cells are organised into tissues and in turn the tissues
are organised into organs. Different organs in a plant show differences in
their internal structure. Within angiosperms, the monocots and dicots
are also seen to be anatomically different. Internal structures also show
adaptations to diverse environments.
6.1
THE TISSUE SYSTEM
We were discussing types of tissues based on the types of cells present.
Let us now consider how tissues vary depending on their location in the
plant body. Their structure and function would also be dependent on
location. On the basis of their structure and location, there are three types
of tissue systems. These are the epidermal tissue system, the ground or
fundamental tissue system and the vascular or conducting tissue system.
6.1.1
Epidermal Tissue System
The epidermal tissue system forms the outer-most covering of the whole
plant body and comprises epidermal cells, stomata and the epidermal
appendages – the trichomes and hairs. The epidermis is the outermost
la

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-7.pdf ===
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS
79
In the preceding chapters you came across a large variety of organisms,
both unicellular and multicellular, of the animal kingdom. In unicellular
organisms, all functions like digestion, respiration and reproduction
are performed by a single cell. In the complex body of multicellular
animals the same basic functions are carried out by different groups of
cells in a well organised manner. The body of a simple organism like
Hydra is made of different types of cells and the number of cells in each
type can be in thousands. The human body is composed of billions of
cells to perform various functions. How do these cells in the body work
together? As you have already learnt in your earlier classes, in
multicellular animals, a group of similar cells alongwith intercellular
substances perform a specific function. Such an organisation is called
tissue.
You may be surprised to know that all complex animals consist of
only four basic types of tissues. These tissues are organised in specific
proportion and pattern to form an organ like stomach, lung, heart and
kidney. When two or more organs perform a common function by their
physical and/or chemical interaction, they together form organ system,
e.g., digestive system, respiratory system, etc. Cells, tissues, organs and
organ systems split up the work in a way that exhibits division of labour
and contribute to the survival of the body as a whole.
7.1 ORGAN AND ORGAN SYSTEM
The basic tissues as you ha

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-8.pdf ===
UNIT 3
Biology is the study of living organisms. The detailed description of
their form and appearance only brought out their diversity. It is the
cell theory that emphasised the unity underlying this diversity of forms,
i.e., the cellular organisation of all life forms. A description of cell
structure and cell growth by division is given in the chapters comprising
this unit. Cell theory also created a sense of mystery around living
phenomena, i.e., physiological and behavioural processes. This mystery
was the requirement of integrity of cellular organisation for living
phenomena to be demonstrated or observed. In studying and
understanding the physiological and behavioural processes, one can
take a physico-chemical approach and use cell-free systems to
investigate. This approach enables us to describe the various processes
in molecular terms. The approach is established by analysis of living
tissues for elements and compounds. It will tell us what types of organic
compounds are present in living organisms. In the next stage, one can
ask the question: What are these compounds doing inside a cell? And,
in what way they carry out gross physiological processes like digestion,
excretion, memory, defense, recognition, etc. In other words we answer
the question, what is the molecular basis of all physiological processes?
It can also explain the abnormal processes that occur during any
diseased condition. This physico-chemical approach to study and
understand living organisms is cal

=== BIOLOGY C11 | Biology/Class 11-Biology/ncert-books-class-11-biology-chapter-9.pdf ===
104
BIOLOGY
There is a wide diversity in living organisms in our biosphere. Now a
question that arises in our minds is: Are all living organisms made of the
same chemicals, i.e., elements and compounds? You have learnt in
chemistry how elemental analysis is performed. If we perform such an
analysis on a plant tissue, animal tissue or a microbial paste, we obtain a
list of elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and several others and
their respective content per unit mass of a living tissue. If the same analysis
is performed on a piece of earth’s crust as an example of non-living matter,
we obtain a similar list. What are the differences between the two lists? In
absolute terms, no such differences could be made out. All the elements
present in a sample of earth’s crust are also present in a sample of living
tissue. However, a closer examination reveals that the relative abundance
of carbon and hydrogen with respect to other elements is higher in any
living organism than in earth’s crust (Table 9.1).
9.1 HOW TO ANALYSE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION?
We can continue asking in the same way, what type of organic compounds
are found in living organisms? How does one go about finding the answer?
To get an answer, one has to perform a chemical analysis. We can take any
living tissue (a vegetable or a piece of liver, etc.) and grind it in trichloroacetic
acid (Cl3CCOOH) using a mortar and a pestle. We obtain a thick slurry. If
we were to strain this through a cheesecloth or cotton we would ob

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-1.pdf ===
Biology in essence is the story of life on earth. While individual
organisms die without fail, species continue to live through
millions of years unless threatened by natural or anthropogenic
extinction. Reproduction becomes a vital process without
which species cannot survive for long. Each individual leaves
its progeny by asexual or sexual means. Sexual mode of
reproduction enables creation of new variants, so that survival
advantage is enhanced. This unit explains the details of
reproductive processes in flowering plants and humans as easy
to relate representative examples. A related perspective on
human reproductive health and how reproductive ill health
can be avoided is also presented to complete our
understanding of biology of reproduction.
Chapter 1
Sexual Reproduction in
flowering Plants
Chapter 2
Human Reproduction
Chapter 3
Reproductive Health
2024-25

PANCHANAN MAHESHWARI
(1904-1966)
Born in November 1904 in Jaipur (Rajasthan) Panchanan Maheshwari
rose to become one of the most distinguished botanists not only of India
but of the entire world. He moved to Allahabad for higher education
where he obtained his D.Sc. During his college days, he was inspired
by Dr W. Dudgeon, an American missionary teacher, to develop interest
in Botany and especially morphology. His teacher once expressed that
if his student progresses ahead of him, it will give him a great satisfaction.
These words encouraged Panchanan to enquire what he could do for
his teacher in return.
He worked 

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-10.pdf ===
Biotechnology, as you would have learnt from the
previous chapter, essentially deals with industrial scale
production of biopharmaceuticals and biologicals using
genetically modified microbes, fungi, plants and animals.
The applications of biotechnology include therapeutics,
diagnostics, genetically modified crops for agriculture,
processed food, bioremediation, waste treatment, and
energy production. Three critical research areas of
biotechnology are:
(i)
Providing the best catalyst in the form of improved
organism usually a microbe or pure enzyme.
(ii)
Creating optimal conditions through engineering for
a catalyst to act, and
(iii)
Downstream processing technologies to purify the
protein/organic compound.
Let us now learn how human beings have used
biotechnology to improve the quality of human life,
especially in the field of food production and health.
10.1 BIOTECHNOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS IN
AGRICULTURE
Let us take a look at the three options that can be thought
for increasing food production
(i)
agro-chemical based agriculture;
CHAPTER 10
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS
APPLICATIONS
10.1 Biotechnological
Applications in
Agriculture
10.2 Biotechnological
Applications in
Medicine
10.3 Transgenic Animals
10.4 Ethical Issues
2024-25

178
BIOLOGY
(ii)
organic agriculture; and
(iii)
genetically engineered crop-based agriculture.
The Green Revolution succeeded in tripling the food supply but yet
it was not enough to feed the growing human population. Increased yields
have partly been due to

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-13.pdf ===
If an alien from a distant galaxy were to visit our planet
Earth, the first thing that would amaze and baffle him
would most probably be the enormous diversity of life
that he would encounter. Even for humans, the rich variety
of living organisms with which they share this planet never
ceases to astonish and fascinate us.  The common man
would find it hard to believe that there are more than
20,000 species of ants, 3,00,000 species of beetles, 28,000
species of fishes and nearly 20,000 species of orchids.
Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have been trying
to understand the significance of such diversity by asking
important questions– Why are there so many species?
Did such great diversity exist throughout earth’s history?
How did this diversification come about?  How and why
is this diversity important to the biosphere? Would it
function any differently if the diversity was much less?
How do humans benefit from the diversity of life?
13.1 BIODIVERSITY
In our biosphere immense diversity (or heterogeneity)
exists not only at the species level but at all levels of
biological organisation ranging from macromolecules
within cells to biomes.  Biodiversity is the term popularised
by the sociobiologist Edward Wilson to describe the
CHAPTER 13
BIODIVERSITY AND
CONSERVATION
13.1 Biodiversity
13.2 Biodiversity Conservation
2024-25

217
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
combined diversity at all the levels of biological organisation.
The most important of them are–
(i)
Genetic diversity

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-3.pdf ===
You have learnt about human reproductive system and its
functions in Chapter 2. Now, let’s discuss a closely related
topic – reproductive health. What do we understand by
this term?  The term simply refers to healthy reproductive
organs with normal functions. However, it has a broader
perspective and includes the emotional and social aspects
of reproduction also. According to the World Health
Organisation (WHO), reproductive health means a total
well-being in all aspects of reproduction, i.e., physical,
emotional, behavioural and social. Therefore, a society with
people having physically and functionally normal
reproductive organs and normal emotional and behavioural
interactions among them in all sex-related aspects might
be called reproductively healthy. Why is it significant to
maintain reproductive health and what are the methods
taken up to achieve it? Let us examine them.
3.1 REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH – PROBLEMS AND
STRATEGIES
India was amongst the first countries in the world to
initiate action plans and programmes at a national level
to attain total reproductive health as a social goal.
These programmes called ‘family planning’ were
initiated in 1951 and were periodically assessed over
the past decades. Improved programmes covering wider
CHAPTER 3
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
3.1
Reproductive Health –
Problems and Strategies
3.2
Population Explosion and
Birth Control
3.3
Medical Termination of
Pregnancy
3.4
Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
3.5
Infertility
2024-25

42
BIOLOGY
reproducti

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-4.pdf ===
The work of Mendel and others who followed him gave us an
idea of inheritance patterns. However the nature of those ‘factors’
which determine the phenotype was not very clear. As these
‘factors’ represent the genetic basis of inheritance, understanding
the structure of genetic material and the structural basis of
genotype and phenotype conversion became the focus of
attention in biology for the next century. The entire body of
molecular biology was a consequent development with major
contributions from Watson, Crick, Nirenberg, Khorana, Kornbergs
(father and son), Benzer, Monod, Brenner, etc. A parallel problem
being tackled was the mechanism of evolution. Awareness in the
areas of molecular genetics, structural biology and bio informatics
have enriched our understanding of the molecular basis of
evolution. In this unit the structure and function of DNA and the
story and theory of evolution have been examined and explained.
Chapter 4
Principles of Inheritance
and Variation
Chapter 5
Molecular Basis of Inheritance
Chapter 6
Evolution
2024-25

James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago on 6 April 1928. In 1947, he
received B.Sc. degree in Zoology. During these years his interest in
bird-watching had matured into a serious desire to learn genetics. This
became possible when he received a Fellowship for graduate study in
Zoology at Indiana University, Bloomington, where he received his Ph.D.
degree in 1950 on a study of the effect of hard X-rays on bacteriophage
multiplication.
He me

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-5.pdf ===
CHAPTER 5
MOLECULAR BASIS OF
INHERITANCE
5.1
The DNA
5.2
The Search for Genetic
Material
5.3
RNA World
5.4
Replication
5.5
Transcription
5.6
Genetic Code
5.7
Translation
5.8
Regulation of Gene
Expression
5.9
Human Genome Project
5.10 DNA Fingerprinting
In the previous chapter, you have learnt the inheritance
patterns and the genetic basis of such patterns. At the
time of Mendel, the nature of those ‘factors’ regulating
the pattern of inheritance was not clear. Over the next
hundred years, the nature of the putative genetic material
was investigated culminating in the realisation that
DNA – deoxyribonucleic acid – is the genetic material, at
least for the majority of organisms. In class XI you have
learnt that nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid
(RNA) are the two types of nucleic acids found in living
systems. DNA acts as the genetic material in most of the
organisms. RNA though it also acts as a genetic material
in some viruses, mostly functions as a messenger. RNA
has additional roles as well. It functions as adapter,
structural, and in some cases as a catalytic molecule. In
Class XI you have already learnt the structures of
nucleotides and the way these monomer units are linked
to form nucleic acid polymers. In this chapter we are going
to discuss the structure of DNA, its replication, the process
of making RNA from DNA (transcription), the genetic code
that determines the sequences of amino acids in proteins,
the proc

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-6.pdf ===
110
BIOLOGY
Evolutionary Biology is the study of history of life forms
on earth. What exactly is evolution? To understand the
changes in flora and fauna that have occurred over millions
of years on earth, we must have an understanding of the
context of origin of life, i.e., evolution of earth, of stars and
indeed of the universe itself. What follows is the longest of
all the construed and conjectured stories. This is the story
of origin of life and evolution of life forms or biodiversity on
planet earth in the context of evolution of earth and against
the background of evolution of universe itself.
6.1 ORIGIN OF LIFE
When we look at stars on a clear night sky we are, in a
way,  looking back in time. Stellar distances are measured
in light years. What we see today is an object whose emitted
light started its journey millions of year back and from
trillions of kilometres away and reaching our eyes now.
However, when we see objects in our immediate
surroundings we see them instantly and hence in the
present time. Therefore, when we see stars we apparently
are peeping into the past.
The origin of life is considered a unique event in the
history of universe. The universe is vast. Relatively speaking
the earth itself is almost only a speck. The universe is very
CHAPTER 6
EVOLUTION
6.1
Origin of Life
6.2
Evolution of Life Forms - A
Theory
6.3
What are the Evidences
for Evolution?
6.4
What is Adaptive
Radiation?
6.5
Biological Evolution
6.6
Mechanism of Evolution
6.7
Hardy - Weinberg

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-7.pdf ===
Chapter 7
Human Health and Disease
Chapter 8
Microbes in Human Welfare
Biology is the youngest of the formalised disciplines of natural
science. Progress in physics and chemistry proceeded much
faster than in Biology. Applications of physics and chemistry in
our daily life also have a higher visibility than those of biology.
However, twentieth century and certainly twenty-first century
has demonstrated the utility of biological knowledge in
furthering human welfare, be it in health sector or agriculture.
The discovery of antibiotics, and synthetic plant-derived drugs,
anaesthetics have changed medical practice on one hand
and human health on the other hand. Life expectancy of
human beings have dramatically changed over the years.
Agricultural practices, food processing and diagnostics have
brought socio-cultural changes in human communities. These
are briefly described in the following three chapters of this unit.
2024-25

Born in August 1925 in Kumbakonam in Tamil Nadu, Monkambu Sambasivan
Swaminathan did his graduation and post-graduation in Botany from
Madras University. He worked in different capacities in large number of
institutions in India and abroad and developed his expertise in genetics
and plant breeding.
The School of Cytogenetics and Radiation Research established at the
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) enabled Swaminathan and his
team to develop short-duration high-yielding varieties of rice including scented
Basmati. He is also known for the devel

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-8.pdf ===
Besides macroscopic plants and animals, microbes are
the major components of biological systems on this earth.
You have studied about the diversity of living organisms
in Class XI. Do you remember which Kingdoms among
the living organisms contain micro-organisms? Which are
the ones that are only microscopic? Microbes are present
everywhere – in soil, water, air, inside our bodies and that
of other animals and plants. They are present even at sites
where no other life-form could possibly exist–sites such
as deep inside the geysers (thermal vents) where the
temperature may be as high as 1000C, deep in the soil,
under the layers of snow several metres thick, and in highly
acidic environments. Microbes are diverse–protozoa,
bacteria, fungi and microscopic animal and plant viruses,
viroids and also prions that are proteinacious infectious
agents. Some of the microbes are shown in Figures 8.1
and 8.2.
Microbes like bacteria and many fungi can be grown
on nutritive media to form colonies (Figure 8.3), that can
be seen with the naked eyes.  Such cultures are useful in
studies on micro-organisms.
CHAPTER 8
MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE
8.1
Microbes in Household
Products
8.2
Microbes in Industrial
Products
8.3
Microbes in Sewage
Treatment
8.4
Microbes in Production of
Biogas
8.5
Microbes as Biocontrol
Agents
8.6
Microbes as Biofertilisers
2024-25

150
BIOLOGY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.3
(a) Colonies of bacteria growing in a petri dish;
(b) Fungal colony growing in a petri dish
(a)
(b)
(

=== BIOLOGY C12 | Biology/Class 12-Biology/ncert-books-class-12-biology-chapter-9.pdf ===
Ever since the days of Rene Descartes, the French philosopher,
mathematician and biologist of seventeenth century, all human
knowledge especially natural sciences were directed to develop
technologies which add to the creature comforts of human
lives, as also value to human life. The whole approach to
understanding natural phenomena became anthropocentric.
Physics and chemistry gave rise to engineering, technologies
and industries which all worked for human comfort and welfare.
The major utility of the biological world is as a source of food.
Biotechnology, the twentieth century off-shoot of modern
biology, changed our daily life as its products  brought
qualitative improvement in health and food production. The
basic principles underlying biotechnological processes and some
applications are highlighted and discussed in this unit.
Chapter 9
Biotechnology : Principles and
Processes
Chapter 10
Biotechnology and Its
Applications
2024-25

Herbert Boyer was born in 1936 and brought up in a corner of western
Pennsylvania where railroads and mines were the destiny of most young
men. He completed graduate work at the University of Pittsburgh, in
1963, followed by three years of post-graduate studies at Yale.
In 1966, Boyer took over assistant professorship at the University of
California at San Francisco. By 1969, he performed studies on a couple
of restriction enzymes of the E. coli bacterium with especially useful
properties. Boyer observed that these enzymes have the capability of

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-1.pdf ===
UNIT 1
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
Science can be viewed as a continuing human effort to 
systematise knowledge for describing and understanding 
nature. You have learnt in your previous classes that we 
come across diverse substances present in nature and 
changes in them in daily life. Curd formation from milk, 
formation of vinegar from sugarcane juice on keeping 
for prolonged time and rusting of iron are some of the 
examples of changes which we come across many times. 
For the sake of convenience, science is sub-divided into 
various disciplines: chemistry, physics, biology, geology, 
etc. The branch of science that studies the preparation, 
properties, structure and reactions of material substances 
is called chemistry.
DEVELOPMENT OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry, as we understand it today, is not a very old 
discipline. Chemistry was not studied for its own sake, rather 
it came up as a result of search for two interesting things:
	
i.	 Philosopher’s stone (Paras) which would convert 
all baser metals e.g., iron and copper into gold.
	
ii.	 ‘Elixir of life’ which would grant immortality.
People in ancient India, already had the knowledge of 
many scientific phenomenon much before the advent of 
modern science. They applied that knowledge in various 
walks of life. Chemistry developed mainly in the form 
of Alchemy and Iatrochemistry during 1300-1600 CE. 
Modern chemistry took shape in the 18th century Europe, 
after a few centuries of alchemical traditions which were 
int

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-2.pdf ===
The rich diversity of chemical behaviour of different 
elements can be traced to the differences in the internal 
structure of atoms of these elements.
Unit 2
structure of atom
After studying this unit you will be 
able to
•	
know about the discovery of 
electron, proton and neutron and 
their characteristics;
•	
describe Thomson, Rutherford 
and Bohr atomic models;
•	
understand the important features 
of the quantum mechanical model 
of atom;
•	
u n d e r s t a n d  n a t u r e  o f 
electromagnetic radiation and 
Planck’s quantum theory; 
•	
explain the photoelectric effect 
and describe features of atomic 
spectra;
•	
state the de Broglie relation and 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle; 
• 
define an atomic orbital in terms 
of quantum numbers;
•	
state aufbau principle, Pauli 
exclusion principle and Hund’s 
rule of maximum multiplicity; and
• 
write the electronic configurations 
of atoms.
The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time 
of early Indian and Greek philosophers (400 B.C.) who 
were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building 
blocks of matter. According to them, the continued 
subdivisions of matter would ultimately yield atoms 
which would not be further divisible. The word ‘atom’ 
has been derived from the Greek word ‘a-tomio’ which 
means ‘uncut-able’ or ‘non-divisible’. These earlier ideas 
were mere speculations and there was no way to test 
them experimentally. These ideas remained dormant  for 
a very long time and were revived again

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-3.pdf ===
The Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept 
in chemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the 
everyday support for students, it suggests new avenues 
of research to professionals, and it provides a succinct 
organization of the whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable 
demonstration of the fact that the chemical elements are 
not a random cluster of entities but instead display trends 
and lie together in families. An awareness of the Periodic 
Table is essential to anyone who wishes to disentangle 
the world and see how it is built up from the fundamental 
building blocks of the chemistry, the chemical elements.
	
Glenn T. Seaborg
Unit 3
Classification of Elements and 
Periodicity in Properties
After studying this Unit, you will be 
able to 
• 
appreciate how the concept of 
grouping elements in accordance 
to their properties led to the 
development of Periodic Table.
• 
understand  the Periodic Law; 
• understand the  significance of 
atomic number and electronic 
configuration as the basis for 
periodic classification;
• 
n a m e  t h e  e l e m e n t s  w i t h  
Z >100 according to IUPAC 
nomenclature; 
• 
classify elements into s, p, d, 
f blocks and learn their main 
characteristics;
• 
recognise the periodic trends in 
physical and chemical properties 
of elements;
• 
compare the reactivity of elements 
and correlate it with their 
occurrence in nature;
• 
explain the relationship  between 
ionization enthalpy and metallic 
character;
• 
use  s

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-5.pdf ===
Thermodynamics
It is the only physical theory of universal content concerning 
which I am convinced that, within the framework of the 
applicability of its basic concepts, it will never be overthrown.
Albert Einstein
Chemical energy stored by molecules can be released as 
heat during chemical reactions when a fuel like methane, 
cooking gas or coal burns in air. The chemical energy may 
also be used to do mechanical work when a fuel burns 
in an engine or to provide electrical energy through a 
galvanic cell like dry cell. Thus, various forms of energy 
are interrelated and under certain conditions, these may 
be transformed from one form into  another. The study 
of these energy transformations forms the subject matter 
of thermodynamics. The laws of thermodynamics deal 
with energy changes of macroscopic systems involving 
a large number of molecules rather than microscopic 
systems containing a few molecules. Thermodynamics is 
not concerned about how and at what rate these energy 
transformations are carried out, but is based on initial and 
final states of a system undergoing the change. Laws of 
thermodynamics apply only when a system is in equilibrium 
or moves from one equilibrium state to another equilibrium 
state. Macroscopic properties like pressure and temperature 
do not change with time for a system in equilibrium state. 
In this unit, we would like to answer some of the important 
questions through thermodynamics, like:
How do we determine the energy changes i

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-6.pdf ===
Unit 6
Equilibrium
Chemical equilibria are important in numerous biological 
and environmental processes. For example, equilibria 
involving O2 molecules and the protein hemoglobin play 
a crucial role in the transport and delivery of O2 from 
our lungs to our muscles. Similar equilibria involving CO 
molecules and hemoglobin account for the toxicity of CO.
When a liquid evaporates in a closed container, 
molecules with relatively higher kinetic energy escape 
the liquid surface into the vapour phase and number of 
liquid molecules from the vapour phase strike the liquid 
surface and are retained in the liquid phase. It gives rise 
to a constant vapour pressure because of an equilibrium in 
which the number of molecules leaving the liquid equals the 
number returning to liquid from the vapour. We say that 
the system has reached equilibrium state at this stage. 
However, this is not static equilibrium and there is a lot of 
activity at the boundary between the liquid and the vapour. 
Thus, at equilibrium, the rate of evaporation is equal to the 
rate of condensation. It may be represented by
H2O (l)  
 H2O (vap)
The double half arrows indicate that the processes 
in both the directions are going on simultaneously. The 
mixture of reactants and products in the equilibrium state 
is called an equilibrium mixture.
Equilibrium can be established for both physical 
processes and chemical reactions. The reaction may be 
fast or slow depending on the experimental conditions and 
the

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-7.pdf ===
235
redox reactions
Chemistry deals with varieties of matter and change 
of one kind of matter into the other. Transformation of 
matter from one kind into another occurs through the 
various types of reactions. One important category of such 
reactions is Redox Reactions. A number of phenomena, 
both physical as well as biological, are concerned with 
redox reactions. These reactions find extensive use in 
pharmaceutical, biological, industrial, metallurgical and 
agricultural areas. The importance of these reactions is 
apparent from the fact that burning of different types of 
fuels for obtaining energy for domestic, transport and 
other commercial purposes, electrochemical processes 
for extraction of highly reactive metals and non-metals, 
manufacturing of  chemical  compounds like  caustic 
soda, operation of dry and wet batteries and corrosion of 
metals fall within the purview of redox processes. Of late, 
environmental issues like Hydrogen Economy (use of 
liquid hydrogen as fuel) and development of ‘Ozone Hole’ 
have started figuring under redox phenomenon. 
7.1 CLASSICAL IDEA OF REDOX REACTIONS – 
OXIDATION AND REDUCTION REACTIONS
Originally, the term oxidation was used to describe the 
addition of oxygen to an element or a compound. Because 
of the presence of dioxygen in the atmosphere (~20%), 
many elements combine with it and this is the principal 
reason why they commonly occur on the earth in the  
form of their oxides. The following reactions represent 
oxid

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-8.pdf ===
256
chemistry
Organic Chemistry – Some Basic  
Principles and Techniques
After studying this unit, you will 
be able to 
•	
u n d e r s t a n d  r e a s o n s  f o r 
tetravalence of carbon and 
shapes of organic molecules; 
•	
write structures of organic 
molecules in various ways;
•	
classify the organic compounds; 
•	
name the compounds according 
to IUPAC system of nomenclature 
and also derive their structures 
from the given names;
•	
understand the concept of 
organic reaction mechanism;
•	
explain the influence of electronic 
displacements on structure and 
reactivity of organic compounds;
•	
recognise the types of organic 
reactions;
•	
lear n the techniques of 
p u r i f i c a t i o n  o f  o r g a n i c 
compounds;
•	
write the chemical reactions 
involved in the qualitative 
analysis of organic compounds;
•	
understand the principles 
involved in quantitative analysis 
of organic compounds.
In the previous unit you have learnt that the element 
carbon has the unique property called catenation due to 
which it forms covalent bonds with other carbon atoms. 
It also forms covalent bonds with atoms of other elements 
like hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus 
and halogens. The resulting compounds are studied 
under a separate branch of chemistry called organic 
chemistry. This unit incorporates some basic principles 
and techniques of analysis required for understanding the 
formation and properties of organic compounds.
8.1 General Introduction
Organic com

=== CHEMISTRY C11 | Chemistry/Class 11- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-11-chemistry-chapter-9.pdf ===
295
Hydrocarbons
Unit 9
After studying this unit, you will be 
able to 
•	
name hydrocarbons according to 
IUPAC system of nomenclature; 
•	
recognise and write structures  
o f  i s o m e r s  o f  a l k a n e s , 
alkenes, alkynes and aromatic 
hydrocarbons;
•	
learn about various methods of 
preparation of hydrocarbons;
•	
distinguish between alkanes, 
alkenes, alkynes and aromatic 
hydrocarbons on the basis of 
physical and chemical properties;
•	
draw and differentiate between 
various conformations of ethane;
•	
a p p r e c i a t e  t h e  r o l e  o f 
hydrocarbons as sources of  
energy and for other industrial 
applications;
•	
pr edict the for mation of 
the addition products of 
unsymmetrical alkenes and 
alkynes on the basis of electronic 
mechanism;
•	
comprehend the structure of 
benzene, explain aromaticity  
and understand mechanism  
of electrophilic substitution 
reactions of benzene; 
•	
predict the directive influence of 
substituents in monosubstituted 
benzene ring;
•	
learn about carcinogenicity and 
toxicity.
Hydrocarbons
The term ‘hydrocarbon’ is self-explanatory which means 
compounds of carbon and hydrogen only. Hydrocarbons 
play a key role in our daily life. You must be familiar 
with the terms ‘LPG’ and ‘CNG’ used as fuels. LPG is the 
abbreviated form of liquified petroleum gas whereas CNG 
stands for compressed natural gas. Another term ‘LNG’ 
(liquified natural gas) is also in news these days. This is 
also a fuel and is obtained by liquifacti

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-1.pdf ===
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
·
describe the formation of different
types of solutions;
·
express concentration of solution
in different units;
·
state and explain Henry’s law and
Raoult’s law;
·
distinguish between ideal and
non-ideal solutions;
·
explain deviations of real solutions
from Raoult’s law;
·
describe colligative properties of
solutions and correlate these with
molar masses of the solutes;
·
explain abnormal colligative
properties exhibited by some
solutes in solutions.
In normal life we rarely come across pure substances.
Most of these are mixtures containing two or more pure
substances. Their utility or importance in life depends
on their composition. For example, the properties of
brass (mixture of copper and zinc) are quite different
from those of German silver (mixture of copper, zinc
and nickel) or bronze (mixture of copper and tin);
1 part per million (ppm) of fluoride ions in water
prevents tooth decay, while 1.5 ppm causes the tooth
to become mottled and high concentrations of fluoride
ions can be poisonous (for example, sodium fluoride is
used in rat poison); intravenous injections are always
dissolved in water containing salts at particular ionic
concentrations that match with blood plasma
concentrations and so on.
In this Unit, we will consider mostly liquid
solutions and their formation. This will be followed by
studying the properties of the solutions, like vapour
pressure and colligative properties. We will begin with
types of solut

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-10.pdf ===
A living system grows, sustains and reproduces itself.
The most amazing thing about a living system is that it
is composed of non-living atoms and molecules. The
pursuit of knowledge of what goes on chemically within
a living system falls in the domain of biochemistry. Living
systems are made up of various complex biomolecules
like carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, etc.
Proteins and carbohydrates are essential constituents of
our food. These biomolecules interact with each other
and constitute the molecular logic of life processes. In
addition, some simple molecules like vitamins and
mineral salts also play an important role in the functions
of organisms.  Structures and functions of some of these
biomolecules are discussed in this Unit.
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
Biomolecules
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
•
explain the characteristics of
biomolecules like carbohydrates,
proteins and nucleic acids and
hormones;
•
classify carbohydrates, proteins,
nucleic acids and vitamins on the
basis of their structures;
•
explain the difference between
DNA and RNA;
•
describe the role of biomolecules
in biosystem.
Objectives
“It is the harmonious and synchronous progress of chemical
reactions in body which leads to life”.
10
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit10
Carbohydrates are primarily produced by plants and form a very large
group of naturally occurring organic compounds. Some 

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-2.pdf ===
Electrochemistry is the study of production of
electricity from energy released during spontaneous
chemical reactions  and the use of electrical energy
to bring about non-spontaneous chemical
transformations. The subject is of importance both
for theoretical and practical considerations. A large
number of metals, sodium hydroxide, chlorine,
fluorine and many other chemicals are produced by
electrochemical methods. Batteries and fuel cells
convert chemical energy into electrical energy and are
used on a large scale in various instruments and
devices. The reactions carried out electrochemically
can be energy efficient and less polluting. Therefore,
study of electrochemistry is important for creating new
technologies that are ecofriendly. The transmission of
sensory signals through cells to brain and vice versa
and communication between the cells are known to
have electrochemical origin. Electrochemistry, is
therefore, a very vast and interdisciplinary subject. In
this Unit, we will cover only some of its important
elementary aspects.
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
·
describe an electrochemical cell
and differentiate between galvanic
and electrolytic cells;
·
apply 
Nernst 
equation 
for
calculating the emf of galvanic cell
and define standard potential of
the cell;
·
derive relation between standard
potential of the cell, Gibbs energy
of cell reaction and its equilibrium
constant;
·
define resistivity (r), conductivity
(k) and molar conductivity (✆m) of
ionic sol

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-3.pdf ===
Chemistry, by its very nature, is concerned with change.
Substances with well defined properties are converted
by chemical reactions into other substances with
different properties. For any chemical reaction, chemists
try to find out
(a) the feasibility of a chemical reaction which can be
predicted by thermodynamics ( as you know that a
reaction with DG < 0, at constant temperature and
pressure is feasible);
(b) extent to which a reaction will proceed can be
determined from chemical equilibrium;
(c) speed of a reaction i.e. time taken by a reaction to
reach equilibrium.
Along with feasibility and extent, it is equally
important to know the rate and the factors controlling
the rate of a chemical reaction for its complete
understanding. For example, which parameters
determine as to how rapidly food gets spoiled? How
to design a rapidly setting material for dental filling?
Or what controls the rate at which fuel burns in an
auto engine? All these questions can be answered by
the branch of chemistry, which deals with the study
of reaction rates and their mechanisms, called
chemical kinetics. The word kinetics is derived from
the Greek word ‘kinesis’ meaning movement.
Thermodynamics tells only about the feasibility of a
reaction whereas chemical kinetics tells about the rate
of a reaction.  For example, thermodynamic data
indicate that diamond shall convert to graphite but
in reality the conversion rate is so slow that the change
is not perceptible at all. Therefore, most people t

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-4.pdf ===
The d-block of the periodic table contains the elements
of the groups 3-12 in which the d orbitals are
progressively filled in each of the four long periods.
The f-block consists of elements in which 4 f and 5 f
orbitals are progressively filled. They are placed in a
separate panel at the bottom of the periodic table. The
names transition metals and inner transition metals
are often used to refer to the elements of d-and
f-blocks respectively.
There are mainly four series of the transition metals,
3d series (Sc to Zn), 4d series (Y to Cd), 5d series (La
and Hf to Hg) and 6d series which has Ac and elements
from Rf to Cn. The two series of the inner transition
metals; 4f (Ce to Lu) and 5f (Th to Lr) are known as
lanthanoids and actinoids respectively.
Originally the name transition metals was derived
from the fact that their chemical properties were
transitional between those of s and p-block elements.
Now according to IUPAC, transition metals are defined
as metals which have incomplete d subshell either in
neutral atom or in their ions. Zinc, cadmium and
mercury of group 12 have full d
10 configuration in their
ground state as well as in their common oxidation states
and hence, are not regarded as transition metals.
However, being the end members of the 3d, 4d and 5d
transition series, respectively, their chemistry is studied
along with the chemistry of the transition metals.
The presence of partly filled d or f orbitals in their
atoms makes transition elements different from

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-5.pdf ===
118
Chemistry
In the previous Unit we learnt that the transition metals
form a large number of complex compounds in which
the metal atoms are bound to a number of anions or
neutral molecules by sharing of electrons. In modern
terminology such compounds are called coordination
compounds. The chemistry of coordination compounds
is an important and challenging area of modern
inorganic chemistry. New concepts of chemical bonding
and molecular structure have provided insights into
the functioning of these compounds as vital components
of biological systems. Chlorophyll, haemoglobin and
vitamin B12 are coordination compounds of magnesium,
iron and cobalt respectively. Variety of metallurgical
processes, industrial catalysts and analytical reagents
involve 
the 
use 
of 
coordination 
compounds.
Coordination compounds also find many applications
in electroplating, textile dyeing and medicinal chemistry.
Coordination
Compounds
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
•
appreciate 
the 
postulates 
of
Werner’s theory of coordination
compounds;
•
know the meaning of the terms:
coordination entity, central atom/
ion, ligand, coordination number,
coordination sphere, coordination
polyhedron, oxidation number,
homoleptic and heteroleptic;
•
learn the rules of nomenclature
of coordination compounds;
•
write the formulas and names
of 
mononuclear 
coordination
compounds;
•
define different types of isomerism
in coordination compounds;
•
understand the nature of bonding
in coordination 

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-6.pdf ===
The replacement of hydrogen atom(s) in an aliphatic
or aromatic hydrocarbon by halogen atom(s) results
in the formation of alkyl halide (haloalkane) and aryl
halide (haloarene), respectively. Haloalkanes contain
halogen atom(s) attached to the sp3 hybridised carbon
atom of an alkyl group whereas haloarenes contain
halogen atom(s) attached to sp2 hybridised carbon
atom(s) of an aryl group. Many halogen containing
organic compounds occur in nature and some of
these are clinically useful. These classes of compounds
find wide applications in industry as well as in day-
to-day life. They are used as solvents for relatively
non-polar compounds and as starting materials for
the synthesis of wide range of organic compounds.
Chlorine containing antibiotic, chloramphenicol,
produced by microorganisms is very effective for the
treatment of typhoid fever. Our body produces iodine
containing hormone, thyroxine, the deficiency of which
causes a disease called goiter. Synthetic halogen
compounds, viz. chloroquine is used for the treatment
of malaria; halothane is used as an anaesthetic
during surgery. Certain fully fluorinated compounds
are being considered as potential blood substitutes
in surgery.
In this Unit, you will study the important methods
of preparation, physical and chemical properties and
uses of organohalogen compounds.
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
·
name haloalkanes and haloarenes
according to the IUPAC system of
nomenclature from their given
structures;
·
de

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-7.pdf ===
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
•
name 
alcohols, 
phenols 
and
ethers according to the IUPAC
system of nomenclature;
•
discuss the reactions involved in
the preparation of alcohols from
alkenes, aldehydes, ketones and
carboxylic acids;
•
discuss the reactions involved in
the preparation of phenols from
haloarenes, benzene sulphonic
acids, 
diazonium 
salts 
and
cumene;
•
discuss 
the 
reactions 
for
preparation 
of 
ethers 
from
(i) alcohols and (ii) alkyl halides
and sodium alkoxides/aryloxides;
•
correlate physical properties of
alcohols, phenols and ethers with
their structures;
•
discuss chemical reactions of the
three classes of compounds on
the basis of their functional
groups.
Objectives
Alcohols, phenols and ethers are the basic compounds for the
formation of detergents, antiseptics and fragrances, respectively.
7
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit7
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols,,,,,     Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
and
and
and
and
and     EEEEEther
ther
ther
ther
thersssss
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols
Alcohols,,,,,     Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
Phenols
and
and
and
and
and     EEEEEther
ther
ther
ther
thersssss
You have learnt that substitution of one or more
hydrogen atom(s) from a hydrocarbon by another atom
or a group of atoms result in the formation of an entirely
new compound having altogether different properties
and applications. Alcohols and phenols are formed
when a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon, aliphatic and
arom

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-8.pdf ===
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
•
write the common  and IUPAC
names of aldehydes, ketones and
carboxylic acids;
•
write 
the 
structures 
of 
the
compounds containing functional
groups namely carbonyl and
carboxyl groups;
•
describe the important methods
of preparation and reactions of
these classes of compounds;
•
correlate physical properties and
chemical reactions of aldehydes,
ketones and carboxylic acids,
with their structures;
•
explain the mechanism of a few
selected reactions of aldehydes
and ketones;
•
understand 
various 
factors
affecting the acidity of carboxylic
acids and their reactions;
•
describe the uses of aldehydes,
ketones and carboxylic acids.
Objectives
Carbonyl compounds are of utmost importance to organic
chemistry. They are constituents of fabrics, flavourings, plastics
and drugs.
8
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit8
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes,,,,,     KKKKKeeeeetones
tones
tones
tones
tones
and
and
and
and
and     Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
AAAAAcids
cids
cids
cids
cids
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes
Aldehydes,,,,,     KKKKKeeeeetones
tones
tones
tones
tones
and
and
and
and
and     Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
Carboxylic
AAAAAcids
cids
cids
cids
cids
In the previous Unit, you have studied organic
compounds with functional groups containing carbon-
oxygen single bond. In this Unit, we will study about the
organic compounds containing carbon-oxygen double
bond (>C=O) called

=== CHEMISTRY C12 | Chemistry/Class 12- Chemistry/ncert-books-class-12-chemistry-chapter-9.pdf ===
Amines constitute an important class of organic
compounds derived by replacing one or more hydrogen
atoms of ammonia molecule by alkyl/aryl group(s). In
nature, they occur among proteins, vitamins, alkaloids
and hormones. Synthetic examples include polymers,
dye stuffs and drugs. Two biologically active
compounds, namely adrenaline and ephedrine, both
containing secondary amino group, are used to increase
blood pressure. Novocain, a synthetic amino compound,
is used as an anaesthetic in dentistry. Benadryl, a well
known antihistaminic drug also contains tertiary amino
group. Quaternary ammonium salts are used as
surfactants. Diazonium salts are intermediates in the
preparation of a  variety of aromatic compounds
including dyes. In this Unit, you will learn about amines
and diazonium salts.
I. AMINES
Amines can be considered as derivatives of ammonia,
obtained by replacement of one, two or all the three
hydrogen atoms by alkyl and/or aryl groups.
For example:
Like ammonia, nitrogen atom of amines is trivalent and
carries an unshared pair of electrons.  Nitrogen orbitals
in amines are therefore, sp3 hybridised and the geometry
of amines is pyramidal. Each of  the three sp3 hybridised
orbitals of nitrogen overlap with orbitals of hydrogen or
carbon depending upon the composition of the amines.
The fourth orbital of nitrogen in all amines contains an
unshared pair of electrons.  Due to the presence of
unshared pair of electrons, the angle C–N–E, (where E is
After studying this Un

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-1.pdf ===
CHAPTER ONE
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT
1.1  INTRODUCTION
Measurement of any physical quantity involves comparison
with a certain basic, arbitrarily chosen, internationally
accepted reference standard called unit. The result of a
measurement of a physical quantity is expressed by a
number (or numerical measure) accompanied by a unit.
Although the number of physical quantities appears to be
very large, we need only a limited number of units for
expressing all the physical quantities, since they are inter-
related with one another. The units for the fundamental or
base quantities are called fundamental or base units. The
units of all other physical quantities can be expressed as
combinations of the base units. Such units obtained for the
derived quantities are called derived units. A complete set
of these units, both the base units and derived units, is
known as the system of units.
1.2  THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS
In earlier time scientists of different countries were using
different systems of units for measurement. Three such
systems, the CGS, the FPS (or British) system and the MKS
system were in use extensively till recently.
The base units for length, mass and time in these systems
were as follows :
•
In CGS system they were centimetre, gram and second
respectively.
•
In FPS system they were foot, pound and second
respectively.
•
In MKS system they were metre, kilogram and second
respectively.
The system of units which is at present internationally
accepted for measuremen

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-11.pdf ===
CHAPTER ELEVEN
THERMODYNAMICS
11.1  INTRODUCTION
In previous chapter we have studied thermal properties of
matter. In this chapter we shall study laws that govern
thermal energy. We shall study the processes where work is
converted into heat and vice versa. In winter, when we rub
our palms together, we feel warmer; here work done in rubbing
produces the  ‘heat’.  Conversely, in a steam engine, the ‘heat’
of the steam is used to do useful work in moving the pistons,
which in turn rotate the wheels of the train.
In physics, we need to define the notions of heat,
temperature, work, etc. more carefully.  Historically, it took a
long time to arrive at the proper concept of ‘heat’. Before the
modern picture, heat was regarded as a fine invisible fluid
filling in the pores of a substance.  On contact between a hot
body and a cold body, the fluid  (called caloric) flowed from
the colder to the hotter body ! This is similar to what happens
when a horizontal pipe connects two tanks containing water
up to different heights. The flow continues until the levels of
water in the two tanks are the same.  Likewise, in the ‘caloric’
picture of heat, heat flows until the ‘caloric levels’ (i.e., the
temperatures) equalise.
In time, the picture of heat as a fluid was discarded in
favour of the modern concept of heat as a form of energy. An
important experiment in this connection was due to Benjamin
Thomson (also known as Count Rumford) in 1798. He
observed that boring of a brass cannon generated 

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-12.pdf ===
CHAPTER TWELVE
KINETIC THEORY
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Boyle discovered the law named after him in 1661. Boyle,
Newton and several others tried to explain the behaviour of
gases by considering that gases are made up of tiny atomic
particles. The actual atomic theory got established more than
150 years later. Kinetic theory explains the behaviour of gases
based on the idea that the gas  consists of rapidly moving
atoms or molecules. This is possible as the inter-atomic forces,
which are short range forces that are important for solids
and liquids,  can be neglected for gases. The kinetic theory
was developed in the nineteenth century by Maxwell,
Boltzmann and others. It has been remarkably successful. It
gives a molecular interpretation of  pressure and temperature
of a gas, and is consistent with gas laws and Avogadro’s
hypothesis. It correctly explains specific heat capacities of
many gases. It also relates measurable properties of gases
such as viscosity, conduction and diffusion with molecular
parameters, yielding estimates of molecular sizes and masses.
This chapter gives an introduction to kinetic theory.
12.2 MOLECULAR NATURE OF MATTER
Richard Feynman, one of the great physicists of 20th century
considers the discovery that “Matter is made up of atoms” to
be a very significant one. Humanity may suffer annihilation
(due to nuclear catastrophe) or extinction (due to
environmental disasters) if we do not act wisely. If that
happens, and all of scientific knowledge were to be dest

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-13.pdf ===
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
OSCILLATIONS
13.1
INTRODUCTION
In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions.
You have already learnt about some of them, e.g., rectilinear
motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are
non-repetitive. We have also learnt about uniform circular
motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In
these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of
time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have
enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both
these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the
periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro
about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes
a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro
motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river, the
piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a
motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we
study this motion.
The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its
concepts are required for the understanding of many physical
phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar, the guitar
or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce
pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms
in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about
their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make
the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate
about their equilibrium positions, the average energy 

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-14.pdf ===
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WAVES
14.1
INTRODUCTION
In the previous Chapter, we studied the motion of objects
oscillating in isolation. What happens in a system, which is
a collection of such objects? A material medium provides
such an example. Here, elastic forces bind the constituents
to each other and, therefore, the motion of one affects that of
the other. If you drop a little pebble in a pond of still water,
the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not
remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along
a circle. If you continue dropping pebbles in the pond, you
see circles rapidly moving outward from the point where the
water surface is disturbed. It gives a feeling as if the water is
moving outward from the point of disturbance. If you put
some cork pieces on the disturbed surface, it is seen that
the cork pieces move up and down but do not move away
from the centre of disturbance. This shows that the water
mass does not flow outward with the circles, but rather a
moving disturbance is created. Similarly, when we speak,
the sound moves outward from us, without any flow of air
from one part of the medium to another. The disturbances
produced in air are much less obvious and only our ears or
a microphone can detect them. These patterns, which move
without the actual physical transfer or flow of matter as a
whole, are called waves. In this Chapter, we will study such
waves.
Waves transport energy and the pattern of disturbance has
information that propagate from

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-2.pdf ===
CHAPTER TWO
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE
2.1
Introduction
2.2
Instantaneous velocity and
speed
2.3
Acceleration
2.4
Kinematic equations for
uniformly accelerated motion
2.5
Relative velocity
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2.1  INTRODUCTION
Motion is common to everything in the universe. We walk,
run and ride a bicycle.  Even when we are sleeping, air moves
into and out of our lungs and blood flows in arteries and
veins.  We see leaves falling from trees and water flowing
down a dam.  Automobiles and planes carry people from one
place to the other. The earth rotates once every twenty-four
hours and revolves round the sun once in a year. The sun
itself is in motion in the Milky Way, which is again moving
within its local group of galaxies.
Motion is change in position of an object with time. How
does the position change with time ? In this chapter, we shall
learn how to describe motion. For this, we develop the
concepts of velocity and acceleration. We shall confine
ourselves to the study of motion of objects along a straight
line, also known as rectilinear motion. For the case of
rectilinear motion with uniform acceleration, a set of simple
equations can be obtained. Finally, to understand the relative
nature of motion, we introduce the concept of relative velocity.
In our discussions, we shall treat the objects in motion as
point objects. This approximation is valid so far as the size
of the object is much smaller than the distance it moves in a
reasonable duration of time. 

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-3.pdf ===
CHAPTER THREE
MOTION IN A PLANE
3.1  INTRODUCTION
In the last chapter we developed the concepts of position,
displacement, velocity and acceleration that are needed to
describe the motion of an object along a straight line. We
found that the directional aspect of these quantities can be
taken care of by + and – signs, as in one dimension only two
directions are possible. But in order to describe motion of an
object in two dimensions (a plane) or three dimensions
(space), we need to use vectors to describe the above-
mentioned physical quantities.  Therefore, it is first necessary
to learn the language of vectors. What is a vector? How to
add, subtract and multiply vectors ? What is the result of
multiplying a vector by a real number ? We shall learn this
to enable us to use vectors for defining velocity and
acceleration in a plane. We then discuss motion of an object
in a plane.  As a simple case of motion in a plane, we shall
discuss motion with constant acceleration and treat in detail
the projectile motion. Circular motion is a familiar class of
motion that has a special significance in daily-life situations.
We shall discuss uniform circular motion in some detail.
The equations developed in this chapter for motion in a
plane can be easily extended to the case of three dimensions.
3.2  SCALARS AND VECTORS
In physics, we can classify quantities as scalars or
vectors.  Basically, the difference is that a direction is
associated with a vector but not with a scalar.  A scalar


=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-4.pdf ===
CHAPTER FOUR
LAWS OF MOTION
4.1  INTRODUCTION
In the preceding Chapter, our concern was to describe the
motion of a particle in space quantitatively. We saw that
uniform motion needs the concept of velocity alone whereas
non-uniform motion requires the concept of acceleration in
addition.  So far, we have not asked the question as to what
governs the motion of bodies. In this chapter, we turn to this
basic question.
Let us first guess the answer based on our common
experience. To move a football at rest, someone must kick it.
To throw a stone upwards, one has to  give it an upward
push.  A breeze causes the branches of a tree to swing; a
strong wind can even move heavy objects. A boat moves in a
flowing river without anyone rowing it. Clearly, some external
agency is needed to provide force to move a body from rest.
Likewise, an external force is needed also to retard or stop
motion.  You can stop a ball rolling down an inclined plane by
applying a force against the direction of its motion.
In these examples, the external agency of force (hands,
wind, stream, etc) is in contact with the object. This is not
always necessary. A stone released from the top of a building
accelerates downward due to the gravitational pull of the
earth.  A bar magnet can attract an iron nail from a distance.
This shows that external agencies (e.g. gravitational and
magnetic forces )  can exert  force on a body even from a
distance.
In short, a force is required to put a stationary body in
motion or

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-5.pdf ===
CHAPTER FIVE
WORK, ENERGY AND POWER
5.1  INTRODUCTION
The terms ‘work’, ‘energy’ and ‘power’ are frequently used
in everyday language. A farmer ploughing the field, a
construction worker carrying bricks, a student studying for
a competitive examination, an artist painting a beautiful
landscape, all are said to be working. In physics, however,
the word ‘Work’ covers a definite and precise meaning.
Somebody who has the capacity to work for 14-16 hours a
day is said to have a large stamina or energy. We admire a
long distance runner for her stamina or energy. Energy is
thus our capacity to do work. In Physics too, the term ‘energy’
is related to work in this sense, but as said above the term
‘work’ itself is defined much more precisely. The word ‘power’
is used in everyday life with different shades of meaning. In
karate or boxing we talk of ‘powerful’ punches. These are
delivered at a great speed. This shade of meaning is close to
the meaning of the word ‘power’ used in physics. We shall
find that there is at best a loose correlation between the
physical definitions and the physiological pictures these
terms generate in our minds. The aim of this chapter is to
develop an understanding of these three physical quantities.
Before we proceed to this task, we need to develop a
mathematical prerequisite, namely the scalar product of two
vectors.
5.1.1 The Scalar Product
We have learnt about vectors and their use in Chapter 3.
Physical quantities like displacement, velocity, accelerat

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-6.pdf ===
CHAPTER SIX
SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION
6.1 INTRODUCTION
In the earlier chapters we primarily considered the motion
of a single particle. (A particle is ideally represented as a
point mass having no size.)  We applied the results of our
study even to the motion of bodies of finite size, assuming
that motion of such bodies can be described in terms of the
motion of a particle.
Any real body which we encounter in daily life has a
finite size.  In dealing with the motion of extended bodies
(bodies of finite size) often the idealised model of a particle is
inadequate.  In this chapter we shall try to go beyond this
inadequacy.  We shall attempt to build an understanding of
the motion of extended bodies.  An extended body, in the
first place, is a system of particles.  We shall begin with the
consideration of motion of the system as a whole.  The centre
of mass of a system of particles will be a key concept here.
We shall discuss the motion of the centre of mass of a system
of particles and usefulness of this concept in understanding
the motion of extended bodies.
A large class of problems with extended bodies can be
solved by considering them to be rigid bodies.  Ideally a
rigid body is a body with a perfectly definite and
unchanging shape.  The distances between all pairs of
particles of such a body do not change. It is evident from
this definition of a rigid body that no real body is truly rigid,
since real bodies deform under the influence of forces. But in
many

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-8.pdf ===
CHAPTER EIGHT
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
8.1
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 6, we studied the rotation of the bodies and then
realised that the motion of a body depends on how mass is
distributed within the body.  We restricted ourselves to simpler
situations of rigid bodies.  A rigid body generally means a
hard solid object having a definite shape and size.  But in
reality,  bodies can be stretched, compressed and bent. Even
the  appreciably  rigid  steel bar can be deformed when a
sufficiently large external force is applied on it.  This means
that solid bodies are not perfectly rigid.
A solid has  definite shape and size. In order to change (or
deform) the shape or size of a body, a force  is required. If
you stretch a helical spring by gently pulling its ends, the
length of the spring increases slightly. When you leave the
ends of the spring, it regains its original size and shape.  The
property of a body, by virtue of  which  it tends to regain its
original size and shape when the applied force is removed, is
known as elasticity and the deformation caused is known
as elastic deformation. However, if you apply force to a lump
of putty or mud, they have no gross tendency to regain their
previous shape, and they get permanently deformed. Such
substances are called plastic and this property is called
plasticity. Putty and mud are close to ideal plastics.
 The elastic behaviour of materials plays an important role
in engineering design.  For example, while designing a
building,

=== PHYSICS C11 | Physics/Class 11-Physics/ncert-books-class-11-physics-chapter-9.pdf ===
CHAPTER NINE
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we shall study  some common physical
properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can  flow
and are therefore, called  fluids.  It is this property that
distinguishes liquids and gases from solids in a basic way.
Fluids are everywhere around us. Earth has an envelop of
air and two-thirds of its surface is covered with water.  Water
is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian
body constitute mostly of water. All the  processes occurring
in living beings including plants are mediated by fluids. Thus
understanding the behaviour and properties of fluids is
important.
How are fluids different from solids? What is common in
liquids and gases? Unlike  a solid, a fluid has no definite
shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,
whereas a gas fills the entire volume of its container. We
have learnt in the previous chapter that the volume of solids
can be changed by stress. The volume of solid, liquid or gas
depends on the stress or pressure acting on it. When we
talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pressure. The difference between gases
and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to  change of external pressure is rather small.
In other words solids and liquids have much lower
compressibility as compared to gases.
Shear stress can change the shape of a solid keeping its
volume fixed. The key propert

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph201.pdf ===
Chapter Nine
RAY OPTICS
AND OPTICAL
INSTRUMENTS
9.1  INTRODUCTION
Nature has endowed the human eye (retina) with the sensitivity to detect
electromagnetic waves within a small range of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Electromagnetic radiation belonging to this region of the
spectrum (wavelength of about 400 nm to 750 nm) is called light. It is
mainly through light and the sense of vision that we know and interpret
the world around us.
There are two things that we can intuitively mention about light from
common experience. First, that it travels with enormous speed and second,
that it travels in a straight line. It took some time for people to realise that
the speed of light is finite and measurable. Its presently accepted value
in vacuum is c = 2.99792458 × 108 m s–1.  For many purposes, it suffices
to take c = 3 × 108 m s–1. The speed of light in vacuum is the highest
speed attainable in nature.
The intuitive notion that light travels in a straight line seems to
contradict what we have learnt in Chapter 8, that light is an
electromagnetic wave of wavelength belonging to the visible part of the
spectrum. How to reconcile the two facts? The answer is that the
wavelength of light is very small compared to the size of ordinary objects
that we encounter commonly (generally of the order of a few cm or larger).
In this situation, as you will learn in Chapter 10, a light wave can be
considered to travel from one point to another, along a straight line joining
Reprint 2026-27

Physics


=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph202.pdf ===
255
Wave Optics
Chapter Ten
WAVE OPTICS
10.1  INTRODUCTION
In 1637 Descartes gave the corpuscular model of light and derived Snell’s
law. It explained the laws of reflection and refraction of light at an interface.
The corpuscular model predicted that if the ray of light (on refraction)
bends towards the normal then the speed of light would be greater in the
second medium. This corpuscular model of light was further developed
by Isaac Newton in his famous book entitled OPTICKS and because of
the tremendous popularity of this book, the corpuscular model is very
often attributed to Newton.
In 1678, the Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens put forward the
wave theory of light – it is this wave model of light that we will discuss in
this chapter. As we will see, the wave model could satisfactorily explain
the phenomena of reflection and refraction; however, it predicted that on
refraction if the wave bends towards the normal then the speed of light
would be less in the second medium. This is in contradiction to the
prediction made by using the corpuscular model of light. It was much
later confirmed by experiments where it was shown that the speed of
light in water is less than the speed in air confirming the prediction of the
wave model; Foucault carried out this experiment in 1850.
The wave theory was not readily accepted primarily because of
Newton’s authority and also because light could travel through vacuum
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
256
and it was felt that a wave would always 

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph203.pdf ===
Physics
274
11.1  INTRODUCTION
The Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism and Hertz experiments on
the generation and detection of electromagnetic waves in 1887 strongly
established the wave nature of light. Towards the same period at the end
of 19th century, experimental investigations on conduction of electricity
(electric discharge) through gases at low pressure in a discharge tube led
to many historic discoveries. The discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in 1895,
and of electron by J. J. Thomson in 1897, were important milestones in
the understanding of atomic structure. It was found that at sufficiently
low pressure of about 0.001 mm of mercury column, a discharge took
place between the two electrodes on applying the electric field to the gas
in the discharge tube. A fluorescent glow appeared on the glass opposite
to cathode. The colour of glow of the glass depended on the type of glass,
it  being  yellowish-green for soda glass. The cause of this fluorescence
was attributed to the radiation which appeared to be coming from the
cathode. These cathode rays were discovered, in 1870, by William
Crookes who later, in 1879, suggested that these rays consisted of streams
of fast moving negatively charged particles. The British physicist
J. J. Thomson (1856-1940) confirmed this hypothesis. By applying
mutually perpendicular electric and magnetic fields across the discharge
tube, J. J. Thomson was the first to determine experimentally the speed
Chapter Eleven
DUAL NATURE OF
RADIATIO

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph204.pdf ===
Physics
290
12.1  INTRODUCTION
By the nineteenth century, enough evidence had accumulated in favour of
atomic hypothesis of matter. In 1897, the experiments on electric discharge
through gases carried out by the English physicist J. J. Thomson (1856 –
1940) revealed that atoms of different elements contain negatively charged
constituents (electrons) that are identical for all atoms. However, atoms on a
whole are electrically neutral. Therefore, an atom must also contain some
positive charge to neutralise the negative charge of the electrons. But what
is the arrangement of the positive charge and the electrons inside the atom?
In other words, what is the structure of an atom?
The first model of atom was proposed by J. J. Thomson in 1898.
According to this model, the positive charge of the atom is uniformly
distributed throughout the volume of the atom and the negatively charged
electrons are embedded in it like seeds in a watermelon. This model was
picturesquely called plum pudding model of the atom. However
subsequent studies on atoms, as described in this chapter, showed that
the distribution of the electrons and positive charges are very different
from that proposed in this model.
We know that condensed matter (solids and liquids) and dense gases at
all temperatures emit electromagnetic radiation in which a continuous
distribution of several wavelengths is present, though with different
intensities. This radiation is considered to be due to oscillations of atoms
Chapter Twe

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph205.pdf ===
Physics
306
13.1  INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter, we have learnt that in every atom, the positive
charge and mass are densely concentrated at the centre of the atom
forming its nucleus. The overall dimensions of a nucleus are much smaller
than those of an atom. Experiments on scattering of a-particles
demonstrated that the radius of a nucleus was smaller than the radius
of an atom by a factor of about 104. This means the volume of a nucleus
is about 10–12 times the volume of the atom. In other words, an atom is
almost empty. If an atom is enlarged to the size of a classroom, the nucleus
would be of the size of pinhead. Nevertheless, the nucleus contains most
(more than 99.9%) of the mass of an atom.
Does the nucleus have a structure, just as the atom does?  If so, what
are the constituents of the nucleus?  How are these held together? In this
chapter, we shall look for answers to such questions. We shall discuss
various properties of nuclei such as their size, mass and stability, and
also associated nuclear phenomena such as radioactivity, fission and fusion.
13.2  ATOMIC MASSES AND COMPOSITION OF NUCLEUS
The mass of an atom is very small, compared to a kilogram;  for example,
the mass of a carbon atom, 12C, is 1.992647 × 10–26 kg. Kilogram is not
a very convenient unit to measure such small quantities. Therefore, a
Chapter Thirteen
NUCLEI
Reprint 2026-27

307
Nuclei
different mass unit is used for expressing atomic masses. This unit is the
atomic mass unit (u), defined

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph206.pdf ===
14.1  INTRODUCTION
Devices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are the
basic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery of
transistor in 1948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also called
valves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (often
called plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,
plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).
In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode and
the controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varying
the voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in the
inter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose their
energy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devices
the electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in one
direction). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.
These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operate
generally at high voltages (~100 V) and have limited life and low reliability.
The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductor
electronics goes back to 1930’s when it was realised that some solid-
state semiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controlling
the number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.
Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can change
the number of mobile charges in 

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph2an.pdf ===
344
Physics
 APPENDICES
APPENDIX  A 1
THE GREEK ALPHABET
APPENDIX  A 2
COMMON SI PREFIXES AND SYMBOLS FOR MULTIPLES AND SUB-MULTIPLES
Reprint 2026-27

345
Answers
Appendices
APPENDIX  A 3
SOME IMPORTANT CONSTANTS
OTHER USEFUL CONSTANTS
Reprint 2026-27


=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/leph2dd/leph2ps.pdf ===
PHYSICS
PART – II
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII



=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-1.pdf ===
Chapter One
ELECTRIC CHARGES
AND FIELDS
1.1  INTRODUCTION
All of us have the experience of seeing a spark or hearing a crackle when
we take off our synthetic clothes or sweater, particularly in dry weather.
Have you ever tried to find any explanation for this phenomenon? Another
common example of electric discharge is the lightning that we see in the
sky during thunderstorms. We also experience a sensation of an electric
shock either while opening the door of a car or holding the iron bar of a
bus after sliding from our seat. The reason for these experiences is
discharge of electric charges through our body, which were accumulated
due to rubbing of insulating surfaces. You might have also heard that
this is due to generation of static electricity. This is precisely the topic we
are going to discuss in this and the next chapter. Static means anything
that does not move or change with time. Electrostatics deals with
the study of forces, fields and potentials arising from
static charges.
1.2  ELECTRIC CHARGE
Historically the credit of discovery of the fact that amber rubbed with
wool or silk cloth attracts light objects goes to Thales of Miletus, Greece,
around 600 BC. The name electricity is coined from the Greek word
2024-25
2024-25

2
Physics
elektron meaning amber. Many such pairs of materials were known which
on rubbing could attract light objects like straw, pith balls and bits of
papers.
It was observed that if two glass rods rubbed with wool or silk cloth
are brought clo

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-2.pdf ===
2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  INTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
In Chapters 5 and 7 (Class XI), the notion of potential energy was
introduced. When an external force does work in taking a body from a
point to another against a force like spring force or gravitational force,
that work gets stored as potential energy of the body. When the external
force is removed, the body moves, gaining kinetic energy and losing
an equal amount of potential energy. The sum of kinetic and
potential energies is thus conserved. Forces of this kind are called
conservative forces. Spring force and gravitational force are examples of
conservative forces.
Coulomb force between two (stationary) charges is also a conservative
force. This is not surprising, since both have inverse-square dependence
on distance and differ mainly in the proportionality constants – the
masses in the gravitational law are replaced by charges in Coulomb’s
law. Thus, like the potential energy of a mass in a gravitational
field, we can define electrostatic potential energy of a charge in an
electrostatic field.
Consider an electrostatic field E
 E
 E
 E
 E due to some charge configuration.
First, for simplicity, consider the field EEEEE due to a charge Q placed at the
origin. Now, imagine that we bring a test charge q from a point R to a
point P against the repulsive force on it due to the charge Q. With reference
Chapter Two
ELECTROSTATIC
POTENTIAL AND
CAPACITANCE
2024-25

Physics
46
to Fig. 2.1

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-4.pdf ===
4.1  INTRODUCTION
Both Electricity and Magnetism have been known for more than 2000
years. However, it was only about 200 years ago, in 1820, that it was
realised that they were intimately related. During a lecture demonstration
in the summer of 1820, Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted noticed
that a current in a straight wire caused a noticeable deflection in a nearby
magnetic compass needle. He investigated this phenomenon. He found
that the alignment of the needle is tangential to an imaginary circle which
has the straight wire as its centre and has its plane perpendicular to the
wire. This situation is depicted in Fig.4.1(a). It is noticeable when the
current is large and the needle sufficiently close to the wire so that the
earth’s magnetic field may be ignored. Reversing the direction of the
current reverses the orientation of the needle [Fig. 4.1(b)]. The deflection
increases on increasing the current or bringing the needle closer to the
wire. Iron filings sprinkled around the wire arrange themselves in
concentric circles with the wire as the centre [Fig. 4.1(c)]. Oersted
concluded that moving charges or currents produced a magnetic field
in the surrounding space.
Following this, there was intense experimentation. In 1864, the laws
obeyed by electricity and magnetism were unified and formulated by
Chapter Four
MOVING CHARGES
AND MAGNETISM
2024-25

Physics
108
James Maxwell who then realised that light was electromagnetic waves.
Radio waves were discovered by Hertz

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-5.pdf ===
Physics
136
5.1  INTRODUCTION
Magnetic phenomena are universal in nature. Vast, distant galaxies, the
tiny invisible atoms, humans and beasts all are permeated through and
through with a host of magnetic fields from a variety of sources. The earth’s
magnetism predates human evolution. The word magnet is derived from
the name of an island in Greece called magnesia where magnetic ore
deposits were found, as early as 600 BC.
In the previous chapter we have learned that moving charges or electric
currents produce magnetic fields. This discovery, which was made in the
early part of the nineteenth century is credited to Oersted, Ampere, Biot
and Savart, among others.
In the present chapter, we take a look at magnetism as a subject in its
own right.
Some of the commonly known ideas regarding magnetism are:
(i)
The earth behaves as a magnet with the magnetic field pointing
approximately from the geographic south to the north.
(ii) When a bar magnet is freely suspended, it points in  the north-south
direction. The tip which points to the geographic north is called the
north pole and the tip which points to the geographic south is called
the south pole of the magnet.
Chapter Five
MAGNETISM AND
MATTER
2024-25

137
Magnetism and
Matter
(iii) There is a repulsive force when north poles ( or south poles ) of two
magnets are brought close together. Conversely, there is an attractive
force between the north pole of one magnet and the south pole of
the other.
(iv) We cannot isolate the north,

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-6.pdf ===
Physics
154
6.1  INTRODUCTION
Electricity and magnetism were considered separate and unrelated
phenomena for a long time. In the early decades of the nineteenth century,
experiments on electric current by Oersted, Ampere and a few others
established the fact that electricity and magnetism are inter-related. They
found that moving electric charges produce magnetic fields. For example,
an electric current deflects a magnetic compass needle placed in its vicinity.
This naturally raises the questions like: Is the converse effect possible?
Can moving magnets produce electric currents? Does the nature permit
such a relation between electricity and magnetism? The answer is
resounding yes! The experiments of Michael Faraday in England and
Joseph Henry in USA, conducted around 1830, demonstrated
conclusively that electric currents were induced in closed coils when
subjected to changing magnetic fields. In this chapter, we will study the
phenomena associated with changing magnetic fields and understand
the underlying principles. The phenomenon in which electric current is
generated by varying magnetic fields is appropriately called
electromagnetic induction.
When Faraday first made public his discovery that relative motion
between a bar magnet and a wire loop produced a small current in the
latter, he was asked, “What is the use of it?” His reply was: “What is the
use of a new born baby?” The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction
Chapter Six
ELECTROMAGNETIC
INDUCTION
2024-25

Electro

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-7.pdf ===
7.1  INTRODUCTION
We have so far considered direct current (dc) sources and circuits with dc
sources. These currents do not change direction with time. But voltages
and currents that vary with time are very common. The electric mains
supply in our homes and offices is a voltage that varies like a sine function
with time. Such a voltage is called alternating voltage (ac voltage) and
the current driven by it in a circuit is called the alternating current (ac
current)*. Today, most of the electrical devices we use require ac voltage.
This is mainly because most of the electrical energy sold by power
companies is transmitted and distributed as alternating current. The main
reason for preferring use of ac voltage over dc voltage is that ac voltages
can be easily and efficiently converted from one voltage to the other by
means of transformers. Further, electrical energy can also be transmitted
economically over long distances. AC circuits exhibit characteristics which
are exploited in many devices of daily use. For example, whenever we
tune our radio to a favourite station, we are taking advantage of a special
property of ac circuits – one of many that you will study in this chapter.
Chapter Seven
ALTERNATING
CURRENT
*
The phrases ac voltage and ac current are contradictory and redundant,
respectively, since they mean, literally, alternating current voltage and alternating
current current. Still, the abbreviation ac to designate an electrical quantity
displaying simple harmonic tim

=== PHYSICS C12 | Physics/Class 12-Physics/ncert-book-class-12-physics-part-1-chapter-8.pdf ===
Chapter Eight
ELECTROMAGNETIC
WAVES
8.1  INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we learnt that an electric current produces magnetic field
and that two current-carrying wires exert a magnetic force on each other.
Further, in Chapter 6, we have seen that a magnetic field changing with
time gives rise to an electric field. Is the converse also true? Does an
electric field changing with time give rise to a magnetic field? James Clerk
Maxwell (1831-1879), argued that this was indeed the case – not only
an electric current but also a time-varying electric field generates magnetic
field. While applying the Ampere’s circuital law to find magnetic field at a
point outside a capacitor connected to a time-varying current, Maxwell
noticed an inconsistency in the Ampere’s circuital law. He suggested the
existence of an additional current, called by him, the displacement
current to remove this inconsistency.
Maxwell formulated a set of equations involving electric and magnetic
fields, and their sources, the charge and current densities. These
equations are known as Maxwell’s equations. Together with the Lorentz
force formula (Chapter 4), they mathematically express all the basic laws
of electromagnetism.
The most important prediction to emerge from Maxwell’s equations
is the existence of electromagnetic waves, which are (coupled) time-
varying electric and magnetic fields that propagate in space. The speed
of the waves,  according to these equations, turned out to be very close to
2024-25

Physics
20
